Update OTel Custom Instrumentation Pages (#22967)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/tracing/trace_collection/custom_instrumentation/java/otel.md

      text: 'Interoperability of OpenTelemetry API and Datadog instrumented traces'
---

{{% otel-custom-instrumentation-lang %}}

## Setup

<div class="alert alert-info">OpenTelemetry is supported in Java after version 1.24.0.</div>

To configure OpenTelemetry to use the Datadog trace provider:

1. If you have not yet read the instructions for auto-instrumentation and setup, start with the [Java Setup Instructions][15].

1. Make sure you only depend on the OpenTelemetry API (and not the OpenTelemetry SDK).

1. Set the `dd.trace.otel.enabled` system property or the `DD_TRACE_OTEL_ENABLED` environment variable to `true`.

> ## Adding span tags

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Adding span tags
```

> Add custom tags to your spans corresponding to any dynamic value within your application code such as `customer.id`.

Reviewer: To match the DD page, let's add this subheader here:
```suggestion
### Add custom span tags
Add custom tags to your spans corresponding to any dynamic value within your application code such as `customer.id`.
```

```java
import io.opentelemetry.api.trace.Span;

public void doSomething() {
  Span span = Span.current();
  span.setAttribute("user-name", "Some User");
}
```

> ## Adding tags globally to all spans

Reviewer: To match DD API headings
```suggestion
### Adding tags globally to all spans
```

The `dd.tags` property allows you to set tags across all generated spans for an application. This is useful for grouping stats for your applications, data centers, or any other tags you would like to see in Datadog.

```shell
java -javaagent:<DD-JAVA-AGENT-PATH>.jar \
    -Ddd.tags=datacenter:njc,<TAG_KEY>:<TAG_VALUE> \
    -jar <YOUR_APPLICATION_PATH>.jar

```

> ## Setting errors on a root span from a child span

Reviewer: To match DD API headings

```suggestion
### Setting errors on a root span from a child span
```

To set an error on a root span from a child span, you can use the `setStatus` method on the current span like this:

```java
import static io.opentelemetry.api.trace.StatusCode.ERROR;
import io.opentelemetry.api.trace.Span;

public void doSomething() {
  Span span = Span.current();
  span.setStatus(ERROR, "Some error details...");
}
```

> ## Setting tags and errors on a root span from a child span

Reviewer: To match DD API headings
```suggestion
### Setting tags and errors on a root span from a child span
```

      createChildSpan();
    } finally {
      parentSpan.end();
    }
  }

  private void createChildSpan() {
    Span childSpan = tracer.spanBuilder("child-span").startSpan();
    try {
      Span rootSpan = Context.current().get(CONTEXT_KEY);
        if (null != rootSpan) {
          rootSpan.setAttribute("my-attribute", "my-attribute-value");
          rootSpan.setStatus(StatusCode.ERROR, "Some error details...");
        } 
    } finally {
      childSpan.end();
    }
  }

}
```

## Adding spans

If you aren't using a [supported framework instrumentation][17], or you would like additional depth in your application's [traces][16], you may want to add custom instrumentation to your code for complete flame graphs or to measure execution times for pieces of code.

If modifying application code is not possible, use the environment variable dd.trace.methods to detail these methods.

If you have existing @Trace or similar annotations, or prefer to use annotations to complete any incomplete traces within Datadog, use Trace Annotations.

Traces may also be created using the OpenTelemetrey `@WithSpan` annotation as described in [Trace annotations](#trace-annotations).

> ## Trace annotations

Reviewer: To match DD API headings
```suggestion
### Trace annotations
```

Add `@WithSpan` to methods to have them be traced when running OpenTelemetry and the `dd-java-agent.jar`. If the Agent is not attached, this annotation has no effect on your application.
OpenTelemetry's `@WithSpan` annotation is provided by the `opentelemetry-instrumentation-annotations` dependency.

```java
import io.opentelemetry.instrumentation.annotations.WithSpan;

public class SessionManager {

  @WithSpan
  public static void saveSession() {
    // your method implementation here
  }
}
```

> ## Creating new spans

Reviewer: To match DD API headings
```suggestion
### Manually creating a new span
```

      rootSpan.setStatus(StatusCode.ERROR, "Some error details...");
    } finally {
      childSpan.end();
    }
  }

  public OpenTelemetry getOpenTelemetry() {
    Resource resource = Resource.getDefault().toBuilder()
      .put(ResourceAttributes.SERVICE_NAME, "my-service").build();
    OtlpGrpcSpanExporter otlpGrpcSpanExporter = OtlpGrpcSpanExporter.builder()
      .setTimeout(5, TimeUnit.SECONDS).build();
    SdkTracerProvider setTracerProvider = SdkTracerProvider.builder()
      .addSpanProcessor(BatchSpanProcessor.builder(otlpGrpcSpanExporter)
        .setScheduleDelay(100, TimeUnit.MILLISECONDS).build())
      .setResource(resource)
      .build();
    return OpenTelemetrySdk.builder().setTracerProvider(setTracerProvider)
      .buildAndRegisterGlobal();
  }
}
```

## Adding spans

If you aren't using a [supported framework instrumentation][17], or you would like additional depth in your application's [traces][16], you may want to add custom instrumentation to your code for complete flame graphs or to measure execution times for pieces of code.

If modifying application code is not possible, use the environment variable dd.trace.methods to detail these methods.

> If you have existing @Trace or similar annotations, or prefer to use annotations to complete any incomplete traces within Datadog, use Trace Annotations.

Reviewer 2: I suggest replacing that sentence with: 

_Traces may also be created using the OTel `@WithSpan` annotation as described in the following section._

Author: @am312 - Thanks, good note. I replaced the sentence with your suggestion. 👍

      text: 'Interoperability of OpenTelemetry API and Datadog instrumented traces'
---

{{% otel-custom-instrumentation-lang %}}

## Setup

<div class="alert alert-info">OpenTelemetry is supported in Java after version 1.24.0.</div>

To configure OpenTelemetry to use the Datadog trace provider:

1. If you have not yet read the instructions for auto-instrumentation and setup, start with the [Java Setup Instructions][15].

1. Make sure you only depend on the OpenTelemetry API (and not the OpenTelemetry SDK).

1. Set the `dd.trace.otel.enabled` system property or the `DD_TRACE_OTEL_ENABLED` environment variable to `true`.

## Adding span tags

Add custom tags to your spans corresponding to any dynamic value within your application code such as `customer.id`.

```java
import io.opentelemetry.api.trace.Span;

public void doSomething() {
  Span span = Span.current();
  span.setAttribute("user-name", "Some User");
}
```

## Adding tags globally to all spans

> The `dd.tags` property allows setting tags across all generated spans for an application. This can be useful for grouping stats for your applications, data centers, or any other tags you would like to see in Datadog.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `dd.tags` property allows you to set tags across all generated spans for an application. This is useful for grouping stats for your applications, data centers, or any other tags you would like to see in Datadog.
```

import io.opentelemetry.semconv.ResourceAttributes;
import java.util.concurrent.TimeUnit;

public class Example {

  public void doSomething() {
    Tracer tracer = getOpenTelemetry().getTracer("my-scope", "0.1.0");
    Span span = tracer.spanBuilder("my-resource").startSpan();
    try (Scope scope = span.makeCurrent()) {
      // do some work
    } catch (Throwable t) {
      span.recordException(t);
      throw t;
    } finally {
      span.end();
    }
  }

  public OpenTelemetry getOpenTelemetry() {
    Resource resource = Resource.getDefault().toBuilder()
      .put(ResourceAttributes.SERVICE_NAME, "my-service").build();
    OtlpGrpcSpanExporter otlpGrpcSpanExporter = OtlpGrpcSpanExporter.builder()
      .setTimeout(5, TimeUnit.SECONDS).build();
    SdkTracerProvider setTracerProvider = SdkTracerProvider.builder()
      .addSpanProcessor(BatchSpanProcessor.builder(otlpGrpcSpanExporter)
        .setScheduleDelay(100, TimeUnit.MILLISECONDS).build())
      .setResource(resource)
      .build();
    return OpenTelemetrySdk.builder()
      .setTracerProvider(setTracerProvider).buildAndRegisterGlobal();
    }
}
```

## Trace client and Agent configuration

> There are additional configurations possible for both the tracing client and Datadog Agent for context propagation, as well as to exclude specific Resources from sending traces to Datadog in the event these traces are not wanted to count in metrics calculated, such as Health Checks.

Reviewer 3: Same as above. 
```suggestion
There are additional configurations to consider for both the tracing client and Datadog Agent:
- Context propagation with B3 Headers
- Exclude specific resources from sending traces to Datadog if you do not want to include these traces in metrics calculated, such as Health Checks.
```

      text: 'Interoperability of OpenTelemetry API and Datadog instrumented traces'
---

{{% otel-custom-instrumentation-lang %}}

## Setup

> <div class="alert alert-info">OpenTelemetry is supported in Java after version 1.24.0.</div>

Author: @tushar-datadog - I think you added this change to our draft. Do you have an answer for this? Thanks!

}
```

## Setting tags and errors on a root span from a child span

This example demonstrates how to set tags and errors on a root span from a child span:

```java
import io.opentelemetry.api.OpenTelemetry;
import io.opentelemetry.api.trace.Span;
import io.opentelemetry.api.trace.Tracer;
import io.opentelemetry.context.Context;
import io.opentelemetry.context.ContextKey;
import io.opentelemetry.context.Scope;
import io.opentelemetry.exporter.otlp.trace.OtlpGrpcSpanExporter;
import io.opentelemetry.sdk.OpenTelemetrySdk;
import io.opentelemetry.sdk.resources.Resource;
import io.opentelemetry.sdk.trace.SdkTracerProvider;
import io.opentelemetry.sdk.trace.export.BatchSpanProcessor;
import io.opentelemetry.semconv.ResourceAttributes;
import java.util.concurrent.TimeUnit;

public class Example {

  public void begin() {
    tracer = getOpenTelemetry().getTracer("my-scope", "0.1.0");
    Span parentSpan = tracer.spanBuilder("begin").startSpan();
    try (Scope scope = parentSpan.makeCurrent()) {
      createChildSpan();
    } finally {
      parentSpan.end();
    }
  }

  private void createChildSpan() {
    Span childSpan = tracer.spanBuilder("child-span").startSpan();
    try {

>       Span rootSpan = Context.current()

Reviewer 2: It does work as-is.  The rootSpan from `Context.get()` in this case is always an instance of `datadog.trace.instrumentation.opentelemetry14.trace.OtelSpan`.   Adding the null check is a good idea.  I can add that.

>         .get(ContextKey.named("opentelemetry-traces-local-root-span"));

Reviewer 2: good idea. Done.

```java
import io.opentelemetry.instrumentation.annotations.WithSpan;

public class SessionManager {

  @WithSpan
  public static void saveSession() {
    // your method implementation here
  }
}
```

## Creating new spans

To manually create new spans that start a new, independent trace:

```java
import io.opentelemetry.api.OpenTelemetry;
import io.opentelemetry.api.trace.Span;
import io.opentelemetry.api.trace.Tracer;
import io.opentelemetry.context.Scope;
import io.opentelemetry.exporter.otlp.trace.OtlpGrpcSpanExporter;
import io.opentelemetry.sdk.OpenTelemetrySdk;
import io.opentelemetry.sdk.resources.Resource;
import io.opentelemetry.sdk.trace.SdkTracerProvider;
import io.opentelemetry.sdk.trace.export.BatchSpanProcessor;
import io.opentelemetry.semconv.ResourceAttributes;
import java.util.concurrent.TimeUnit;

public class Example {

  public void doSomething() {
    Tracer tracer = getOpenTelemetry().getTracer("my-scope", "0.1.0");
    Span span = tracer.spanBuilder("my-resource").startSpan();
    try (Scope scope = span.makeCurrent()) {
      // do some work
    } catch (Throwable t) {
      span.recordException(t);
      throw t;
    } finally {
      span.end();

>     }

Reviewer 4: This code has nothing related with creating a new independant trace.
It will create a span (`my-resource`) that will be attached to the current trace.
Instead, you are defining the new span as current context for the local thread. 

If you want to create a new trace, use `setNoParent()`, or alternatively a root context as parent.

Author: Fixed the introductory sentence to better reflect what the example does. 👍

Reviewer 4: Great! But wasn't the point of the sample to show how to create a new trace? 🤷  (real question, I don't know what the customer is asking or interested about)

Author: The main goal for this section is **Manually creating a new span**.

  }

  public OpenTelemetry getOpenTelemetry() {
    Resource resource = Resource.getDefault().toBuilder()
      .put(ResourceAttributes.SERVICE_NAME, "my-service").build();
    OtlpGrpcSpanExporter otlpGrpcSpanExporter = OtlpGrpcSpanExporter.builder()
      .setTimeout(5, TimeUnit.SECONDS).build();
    SdkTracerProvider setTracerProvider = SdkTracerProvider.builder()
      .addSpanProcessor(BatchSpanProcessor.builder(otlpGrpcSpanExporter)
        .setScheduleDelay(100, TimeUnit.MILLISECONDS).build())
      .setResource(resource)
      .build();
    return OpenTelemetrySdk.builder()
      .setTracerProvider(setTracerProvider).buildAndRegisterGlobal();
    }
}
```

## Trace client and Agent configuration

There are additional configurations to consider for both the tracing client and Datadog Agent:

> - Context propagation with B3 Headers

Author: Fixed this. I meant to pull the content from from the dd-trace-java page.
